>> Charlie, welcome back to Talk Python to Me. How are you doing?
>> I'm good. Thanks so much for having me back. It's always a pleasure to be on here.
>> Well, you are certainly making waves in the Python space these days with all of your projects and their fastness.
I think you're known as the fast Python guy these days.
Oh, that's not fast enough. We've got to use something from Astral.
>> The fast Python tooling guy, maybe.
>> Yeah, exactly. So interesting. We spoke, I think you've been on twice before, is that right?
>> I think so, yeah. I came on once to talk about Ruff, and then I came on in March shortly after we did the first public release of UV.
>> Right, right. And UV at that time, I'll let you tell people what UV is, but for those who know, it was kind of in the, it has pip-like features.
And now it's got another layer to the onion or another shell to it. And that's actually why I invited you back, because there's a lot of interesting things to talk about there.
>> Yeah, maybe like several more layers too.
>> Okay, well, all right. Well, let's hear about them.
So first of all, I guess, not everyone, believe it or not, not everyone listened to that first Ruff interview, R-U-F-F interview, and those kinds of things.
So I suppose, maybe quick introductions to you, to Astral. How'd you get to where you are?
>> Yeah, totally. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I've been working on Python tooling full-time for a little under two years at this point.
And my journey, I've been writing Python professionally for a long time, but my journey with Python tooling started with Ruff, which is a very fast Python linter, code formatter, and code transformation tool.
And the sort of foundational idea of Ruff was, can we make really fast Python tooling?
And so Ruff is written in Rust, but you don't need to have Rust installed or know anything about Rust to use it.
You can just install it with pip or with whatever you're using.
And that whole sort of story for me started from just working with Python a lot and asking if we could build sort of different Python tooling by using languages like Rust.
So, you know, the first version of Ruff was very minimal, but it's grown from then to have, I don't know, something like 800 plus rules.
If you've used tools like Lake 8 or Pylint in the past, Ruff can do similar things.
So discover issues with your code without running it.
It can also fix them automatically.
And then if you've used tools like Black in the past for code formatting, Ruff can do a similar thing too, where it automatically formats your code.
So that was how I first got started in Python tooling.
And also how I first ended up on Talk Python was people were very interested in this when it came out.
And I think it broke a lot of people's minds in the sense that it really changed what was possible.
You know, maybe an analogy.
So if you have unit tests, but to run the unit test takes 30 minutes, there's no one who doesn't just want to kill time, who's going to say, "I made a small change.
Let me run the test and see how that change did."
But if the test run in 50 milliseconds, you could just set up a thing to just run the test every time code changes and just have a green, red, and white.
And I feel like Ruff did that for linting and formatting.
For me, for example, I have it just run Ruff on, if I ask PyCharm to reformat the code, it uses Ruff to do that.
Or you can check the box to say, "Run it when I hit save," because you won't notice a difference.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, I think that's been one of the really interesting things about working on tooling with the focus on performance has been,
if you build things that are way, way faster than what currently exists, not just a little bit, but significantly faster,
the ergonomics of the tool just change a lot.
So maybe things that you only ran in CI before, you can now run locally.
Maybe things that you now run locally, you can run on save as opposed to on commit or on explicit command.
So that's been a big part of what we've seen with Ruff.
And the other big piece, apart from performance, that I think we sort of accidentally made a lot of progress on with Ruff
was just trying to make things simpler by bundling more stuff together.
Because Ruff can do a lot of different things, and so you don't need to chain together as many tools
to get the kind of setup that you might want to have in your Python projects.
And so a lot of the things we've built with Ruff and with UV, they've had these kind of dual goals of being much faster,
hopefully bringing in some interesting new features and functionality,
but also trying to reduce a little bit of the fragmentation in the tooling and make it easier for people,
especially for newcomers who are writing Python for the first time, to kind of get started.
And we have, well, you have announcements. I have things to discuss with you about them,
about making that even easier. So that's why some of the big features of UV,
for example, what if I don't have Python? Not a problem.
So that's pretty exciting, I think.
Yeah.
Yeah, we'll get into that. But I do want to just not get too far past it,
because even though this episode is not about Ruff, two things.
One, a theme of Astrals is we're going to take some tools or some kind of concept that's been around for a long time,
redo it in Rust, but also not just, well, we ported over the code,
but rethink some of the algorithms and some of the assumptions.
And I think that's also a lot of what makes it faster, like the way UV works with caching and things like that.
Yep.
And there's been a lot of excitement and positivity about that.
But I think there's also been a little suspicion of, wait a minute, if we write this in Rust,
is it really for Python people, by Python people?
Like, what's your take? I have some thoughts that are, I don't see it as a negative,
but I think it's interesting just to discuss where does Rust actually belong here?
Yeah, I mean, I think the way I view it is that just like Python itself is implemented in C,
it makes some sense for the underlying tooling that people are using to be written in a different language
if it means that you can ultimately build tools that are better, at least on some metrics that people care about.
So for me, I sometimes view what we're doing as, we put all this investment into this tooling,
we write all this stuff in Rust, which in theory incurs some cost for us.
Maybe we move a little bit more slowly, maybe it's harder.
And in doing so, we kind of give all these people who are running these commands hundreds of times a day
a big boost in how they work.
And they can keep writing Python, but have a better and better experience writing Python.
So I don't think it actually really says anything personally.
I don't really think it says anything about Python that we write the tooling in Rust.
Because sometimes people will criticize Python for that,
but different languages are useful and good for different things.
And Python is an incredibly productive language.
It's growing more and more every year.
People love writing it.
But maybe it's not the best language to write, a super high performance package manager.
And that's totally fine, because we're going to do that.
And everyone who's writing Python can benefit from it and can leverage it.
I do think that one interesting piece here that we got a lot of skepticism around early on was like,
how can people in the Python community contribute to this if it's not written in Python?
How do you have a sustainable contributor base?
And the interesting thing for me is I actually think we've had a really strong contributor base over time.
We have, I don't know, somewhere between 400 and 500 contributors total maybe in Ruf.
Most of those are one or two small, one or two commits, maybe just one or two time committers.
But a lot of people have come to Ruf and said, I want to learn Rust.
I come from the Python ecosystem.
There's a part of this that's sort of native to what I know, which is the Python language, the Python semantics.
And it's an entry point for me to learn Rust from other people who come from Python.
So I think there is certainly a cost to engaging and a cost for contributors,
because most of our users don't know Rust.
But I don't think it's as steep as people would expect.
And I think over time we have been able to grow a pretty healthy contributor base of many people who have never written Rust before.
Yeah, I agree.
And I was thinking the same thing that you pointed out, that Python itself is written in C.
Generally speaking, of course, there's multiple runtimes and so on and so on.
But CPython, the one that we generally use, is written in C.
And I don't see why there should be an allegiance to C over Rust or anything.
And a lot of the data science tools are written in C or Fortran even, something really wild like that.
And Python is a way to kind of expose them and make them more accessible, more useful,
and make people more productive on top of those.
That's a native code.
Yeah, yeah.
A third example would be Jupyter, JupyterLab, Jupyter Notebook, all those things.
When you talk to the contributors of those projects, they're down in TypeScript and JavaScript most of their day.
So the data science folks don't have to write TypeScript and JavaScript.
They just work in the tooling that's on the front end.
And so it's kind of like, to me, it's kind of like, let's take one for the team.
Yeah.
We'll do this so we all benefit, but you don't have to.
You don't have to do it.
I actually think it's one of the real strengths of Python is the interoperability around native code and extension modules.
It's actually a big part of Python, and it's a big part of why Python has succeeded.
And I think that will actually become more--
I mean, this is sort of going off on a tangent a little bit,
but I think that will become a bigger and bigger part of what Python looks like and what it looks like to work with Python.
Because I think Rust can actually play an interesting role here, because at least from my perspective,
I do not have a systems programming background.
I've definitely not written any C professionally.
I don't think I've ever really written any C++.
And Rust was my first sort of foray into that kind of programming.
And I think, at least for me personally, I found it much more accessible.
And so I think Rust and Python actually have this interesting story where Rust, to some degree,
is this kind of like superpower low-level layer that you can drop into and then expose with a Python CLI forever in a consume.
So anyway, my prediction is I think that will only become more and more of a part of what Python looks like.
And I think that's actually a good thing.
Yeah, I do too. I do too.
Jake out in the audience, Jake Callahan, who says in another comment, "Great timing.
I just released a video on these changes yesterday, so that's awesome."
But said, "The progress made in Ruff and UV sensor introductions clearly demonstrates
that there's a strong contributor base, even when it's based on Rust, right?"
Yeah.
I think another thing that--
I'm not trying to dismiss that it's hard to learn Rust, because I actually think it is pretty hard to learn Rust.
And I think the learning curve is pretty steep.
But I think the thing we found is there are people who are interested and who want to do it.
Sure. Sure. Agreed.
I think another thing that it shows, regardless of Rust or not, is if it's your full-time job,
and there's funding and a team, rather than part-time work,
it can go many times faster towards a goal than before.
I'm sure you've felt that way.
Yeah. We're in a very unique-- I mean, not completely unique, but fairly unique position
whereby we can fund people full-time to work on this stuff.
It's actually just kind of wild to look at how much-- not to sort of talk up our own work,
but just how much you can accomplish in a relatively short period of time with that level of--
when people are kind of unlocked to work in that way and work on those kinds of problems.
So just thinking-- it's like the amount of time we've been able to put into Ruff and UV
is sort of hard to fathom for some open-source projects.
It's like, "Wow, that's incredible."
But from the perspective of a company, it's actually quite reasonable,
and in fact, not even that much.
So I think it's pretty-- the leverage that you have with open-source,
when people are able to invest in it and really focus on it, is pretty amazing
because we work on these things, we improve these things,
and they ship out to, I don't know, millions of users or whatever it is,
and really can provide a huge boost to the ecosystem.
So yeah, being able to work on this stuff full-time,
that was actually something that I decided pretty early on with Ruff,
was the project was growing more and more popular,
and I was like, "I don't know if I can keep up with this if I don't work on it full-time."
And so I'm at least going to see where that goes.
It's possible, right? Here you are.
I mean, it is, but yeah, it's like--
I mean, I just feel like-- I just have a lot of respect for people
who commit significant amounts of their time to open-source alongside everything else.
Because, yeah, I mean, it's an amazing thing, but it's also very challenging.
- Oh, it definitely is. - And it's 24/7.
Well, I think it's really positive that there's a group of people
putting their full effort into especially the UV side of things.
That's going to make a dent.
Yeah, I mean, I think the other thing that's been cool about building this as a company
is that we've been able to bring in a lot of people from outside of Python
to come and work on Python tooling.
And I think that's a really healthy thing for the ecosystem,
because not only are these people, I think, really talented and really great,
but they also bring very different ideas and experiences.
And so we have a lot of cross-pollination on the team.
The team's kind of a mix of people who fall everywhere on the spectrum of--
or axes, I guess, probably not a spectrum--
of how much Rust experience, how much Python experience they have.
Some of them have mostly worked in TypeScript and the JavaScript ecosystem.
So that was sort of an intentional thing for me when thinking about building a team
to work on this stuff was I want to have some people on the team
who are super deep Python experts, and I want to have some people
who bring a totally different perspective to the problems.
So that's been another very cool piece of putting together a team to work on this stuff.
I think that's a great perspective.
All right, one thing before we move on is talk about UV proper.
Closing the loop here.
You mentioned those rules, those 800 Lint rules.
And this resource you have over at docs.astral.sh/ruff/rules is awesome.
So even if you don't use Ruff, you care about, say, PEP 8 naming or something,
you get a warning from Flake 8 or whatever, and it says "Under function name."
What is this error, right? What is this thing?
And then you've got each one of these rules has a "What is this? Why is it bad?
How did you change it? Here's the bad version. Here's the good version."
And so on. And I think this is just a really good resource.
I know you all put a ton of time into it.
I appreciate you calling that out. Yeah, it takes a lot of time.
Once you cover all the rules, maintaining it incrementally is slightly easier.
But when we started this, we had a few hundred rules.
And so it was a lot of contributors who contributed us getting to full coverage here.
It's almost like the Wikipedia of Lint rules or something.
Yeah, I guess maybe one thing I'll say is we have a lot of rules,
but you don't have to use them all.
And the default rule set is actually pretty small.
So even when I work on projects, I don't necessarily enable all the rules.
I typically enable a couple subsets.
So I just think sometimes it can be intimidating to imagine 800 rules being applied over your code base.
So the default rule set is pretty small.
It covers things like unused imports, things that are pretty common and relatively unobjectionable.
And then we have all these different categories for ways that you can level up the level of coverage.
Yeah. I take pretty much the defaults as well on all my projects,
except for wider lines of code, more columns.
Yeah.
On a 32-inch monitor, 80 columns is just a little corner.
We actually took that out of the defaults.
Did you? Oh, beautiful.
I don't need a rough.toml or whatever it was I was putting in there for a configuration.
Yeah, we got rid of that.
Because the thinking there is if you have long lines, they should generally be handled by a formatter, not a linter.
So by default, we don't enforce that.
Okay. Interesting.
And then the single quotes versus double quotes, which we discussed on GitHub, I remember.
I think we talked about it last time.
Yeah, probably.
Yeah.
I talked about that with everyone.
Yeah, and Miguel also agrees here.
Amazing docs.
The rules are top-notch.
Nice work.
I appreciate that.
Okay.
So I know we're going to talk EV, but Kishore does have a good question out there.
And I don't know if speak to it or don't speak to it.
Are there plans for Ruff to become a Pylance alternative?
So a language server of some sort.
Is this anything you're willing to talk about?
I mean, yeah, I think that's an interesting thing that we'll consider.
It's not something that we are committed to doing or committed not to doing, building a language server.
I would say that's probably a few steps away from where we are today.
Because before we would build a language server, we would probably build something like a type checker.
Something that could deal with type inference and better understand the relationships between different parts of your code.
I view that as like, it's not strictly a prerequisite to building a language server, but I view that as a little bit more of a path.
More mypy?
Yeah, more mypy.
I think there's a lot of interesting stuff around building a, well, first of all, of course, there's building a type checker.
But there's also building what I would call a type-aware linter.
You could imagine that Ruff itself could actually get a lot more powerful if it could do all sorts of type inference.
We have some rules that are only supposed to activate on dictionaries.
And we do some sort of bad local type inference and heuristics to figure out if we think a variable is a dictionary.
Like if you call not get on it, it might be a dictionary, right?
So if we knew, there's just a lot of interesting things we could do.
We could build a much better tool.
So it's not just about building a type checker.
It's also about how can we build a much better linter and sort of like set of tools.
But yeah, we're thinking about that a lot.
There's a lot of discussion happening about that, both internally and publicly on the repo and the Discord.
We're thinking a lot about sort of type inference and how to evolve Ruff in that direction.
So yeah, language server may be something we can do eventually.
It's obviously a huge undertaking.
And we want to make sure that like anything we decide to build, we feel a lot of conviction, you know, that it can be great.
Because it's not, doesn't necessarily make sense for us to try and build something that we think is like 5% better than what's out there.
It's very hard to get users to switch to something that's 5% better.
So, you know, when we look at the opportunity set, we're kind of thinking about where can we have a big impact?
What do users really want?
You know, cross-referenced against where do we think there's opportunity to build something that would be an improvement in ways that users care about?
So yeah, very interesting.
Not something we're focused on right now.
The language server piece at least.
Yeah.
You guys are going to need at least a few weeks to get to that, huh?
We're going to need a few weeks to get to language server.
Yeah.
All right.
Ivan out there in the audience says, "Excellent tool.
Ruff and UV have changed my life."
I've talked about Ruff.
That's very nice.
Yeah.
UV, maybe a quick summary for what it is.
And then we could talk about your post, which adds layers of features and capabilities as we get started.
Yeah, totally.
So I came on the show back in March, and we talked a bit about what UV was at the time.
We released UV in mid-February, so that was a couple weeks after.
And UV is our Python packaging tool.
And it's built under a lot of the same sort of design goals as we had for Ruff.
So we wanted it to be extremely fast.
We wanted it to try and bundle a few more things together so that you could use fewer tools to work with Python and be productive with Python.
And we wanted it to be really easy to adopt.
That was another principle that we thought about a lot.
So when we released UV in February, it was framed as a pip alternative.
So the idea was if you've used pip before, pip install, pip uninstall, or tools like pip compile or pip sync, it should be really familiar to you.
So the API that we started with was like UV pip install, UV pip uninstall, UV pip compile.
And it was meant to kind of mirror the pip API.
And the idea there was we wanted it to hopefully be immediately obvious to people how this tool works and what it does.
And also, I guess, to some degree, what it doesn't do.
So we released that in February, and it grew extremely fast.
It's just the adoption, both in terms of raw numbers and just the companies that we talked to that are using it, very quickly, a lot of people were using it.
I consider it a big success.
I'm really happy with how that went.
But it was also, I think, a pretty small-- it was sort of a small portion of what we wanted to build for packaging.
Ultimately, we weren't trying to build just a faster pip.
I think that's a really good starting point for a couple of reasons.
One, much easier for people to adopt.
Two, it required us to build a lot of the fundamental pieces that you need for Python packaging.
In order to build a pip alternative, we had to be able to resolve Python dependencies, install Python packages, understand virtual environments, manipulate all those things.
We had to implement a bunch of standards around introspecting, build distributions and source distributions and virtual environments.
So we had to invest in all these things that I view as kind of like fundamental primitives of working with Python packaging.
But the ultimate goal for us was always, we want to build something that's like a single static binary that you download and install, that just gives you everything you need to be productive with Python.
And from that perspective, a pip alternative is pretty low level.
And we wanted to build something that was a little bit more high level, something that can install Python for you, something that can manage the virtual environment for you,
something where you just do run this file and it figures out the dependencies, installs them, it creates the environments and it runs this file in the environment.
That is what we wanted to build.
So that's what we've been building up to over the past couple of months.
Yeah, amazing.
Of course, you've got to have the UV pip features as a foundation, right?
Because even if you don't, kind of like we talked earlier,
even if you don't expose it directly as a CLI thing from a project management perspective, it's needed, right?
Yeah.
And it's part of meeting people where they are to a certain degree.
Everyone has workflows that are built around pip.
Even people that have other packaging workflows, often those workflows are actually built around pip commands.
And like I said, I view those as a little bit low level.
With pip, the operations are kind of like install this package into this environment, as opposed to here are my dependencies, make sure the world is in sync with my dependencies.
That's what I would consider to be a little bit more high level.
So we built and released that pip interface in February.
And since then, it's basically been hammered by users.
So it's just gotten better and better because they find problems with it and then report them and it just gets better, it gets faster, it's more feature complete.
So we've had a few months to kind of improve it and build on top of it too.
Yeah, that's one of the benefits of such it taking hold so much and people using it so much is they hit the little edge cases all the time.
Yeah, a lot of edge cases.
Yeah, my bad.
Yeah, but it's super fun, like set of problems to work on, by the way, and like really different from rough to like, yeah, rough is more like a compiler.
I would say like we have like a parser and a lexer, you know, all that kind of stuff.
And with UV, it's a lot more, how do we do IO really fast?
Like we have a lot of networking, we're like reading and writing from disk a lot.
There's a lot of interfacing with standards, a lot of interfacing with the registry, everything's async.
So it's just like a very different set of problems.
And it's fun to get to kind of work on both of them because they're just really different.
Yeah, I'm sure they're both fun projects.
And there's some really good ideas and questions in the audience, but we're not ready for them.
So I think when we spoke back in March, one of the things we discussed is how you structured the CLI API in a way to leave space.
So for example, it's not UV install package, it's UV pip install package.
And it's not UV compile --update for dependence, it's UV pip compile or whatever the command is.
I have it alias to a couple of letters and I never think about it again.
But something that's, you've left space in the CLI with these subcommands.
And I think now we're starting to see why you left space.
Yeah, that was pretty controversial at the time and users really hated it.
I mean, they still used it, but it was a lot of people complained about it.
I even found myself saying, maybe we should stop doing this.
Maybe we should just give up because people were complaining and I was annoyed by it and stuff.
But yeah, it's either a huge, obviously, it's either a terrible mistake or it was genius.
I don't actually know, but what it did was, one effect, which I said before,
was it immediately conveyed the rough shape of the commands, like UV pip install.
And then if you've used pip install, you know that the next argument is like a package name or a requirements file.
But the other thing it did is it left space in the CLI for these new APIs that are sort of first class UV APIs.
So instead of doing UV install, when we released in February, it was UV pip install,
which meant that today, this new set of APIs that we launched, let's see, two weeks ago, I think today.
Scroll up, is there a date? There you go, August 20th.
So this new set of APIs that we released are UV lock, UV sync, UV run.
They can all be top level because they're really the first class UV workflows.
The pip API, by the way, still 100% there and we're going to invest in it a lot and continue maintaining it
because that is how most people use UV.
And maybe eventually we want that to be less true, right?
We hope more and more people use the new stuff, but we're going to keep building that.
But for projects that can, we now have this new interface that if you can fit into it,
it's just sort of more powerful and does more for you.
So we saved space in the CLI exactly for this reason, which is we had a bunch of stuff we knew we wanted to build.
And if we polluted, well, not polluted is the wrong word, but if we polluted the interface with UV install.
- Clogged, if you clogged it. - Yeah.
If we lost all that space to those existing commands, it would make things harder.
So I think it's worked. It's done. It's had the intended effect for us.
It kept the space open. It let people use it, conveyed how it works.
And now they kind of exist alongside each other.
And the pip API, you can kind of use them together in certain ways.
And when you use them together, you sort of realize that the pip API is more low level.
It's like the new APIs, you have a PyProject.toml file with your requirements in it,
and you just run UV sync and it will resolve them, create a lock file, install them in a virtual environment.
It's like one command. You could then modify the virtual environment.
You could do UV pip install, blah, blah, blah, and start making edits to it.
That kind of illustrates what I mean by it's like a low level pip API
is where you're kind of manually manipulating things versus these higher level APIs
where you tell us what your dependencies are and then we figure everything out for you.
Yeah, that's excellent. Just one comment on the, it's too many words or it's too long or whatever.
Like I hinted at before, I just have aliases for these.
So for example, I just type PIR and that means UV pip install dash R requirements dot TXT.
I don't care if it's UV pip that or it's pip install dash, like whatever.
I don't want to type any of those. So it's just three PIRs, let's go.
And I've got three or four of those, one to make virtual environments with UV
and a couple of things like that, and one to compile the changes.
For me, I look up the docs, I go, "Okay, well, here's how I'm going to shorten that
to something I never think about again."
That's totally fine.
I guess the workflow for new people.
Maybe that's a good place to talk about the features here.
There's a lot here.
One of the things that, even though it's number three on the list of four things,
is the Python command. So UV python install, UV python list, all of those kinds of things.
Maybe we should start there because without that, we don't have any Python.
Although that runs implicitly under some circumstances, right?
Correct. Part of what we wanted to do with this release was make UV self-bootstrapping,
which sounds complicated, but the idea there is if you don't have Python installed,
UV doesn't depend on Python, it's just a binary.
So you download it, and then when you run a command like UV VM, and you give us a Python version,
if you don't have any Python installed, if you don't have that version installed,
we will download and install it for you.
So you can sort of seamlessly run these commands without worrying about
how do I install Python, where is my Python, etc., etc.
Which means that we can achieve this really cool experience where the whole set of commands
you need to create a Python application are like, you curl install UV,
and then you just run like UV init --python, and we create a project for you,
we download and install that version of Python, you can just start running things.
You don't have to think about how do I install Python, how do I get it on my machine,
do I have the versions I need, anything like that.
So you can obviously turn this stuff off, right, and you can use your own,
it also respects Pythons that you have on your machine already.
But part of the goal was we wanted to get to this, I won't call it the holy grail,
but this experience of you just download the binary, you do UV run,
and everything just works.
So that was a big part of it.
And if you look at the full list of things that we put in this release,
there's kind of a lot of stuff, right?
There's like four bullets of things that each of those could be like a big release.
One is the Python installation, one is we have this sort of tool install,
kind of like PIPX, so if you want to install Ruff globally,
you can do uv tool install Ruff, and we'll install it for you,
it'll get put in your path, everything like that.
We have these project management APIs that I've hinted at a little bit
throughout this conversation, like uv run, uv lock, uv sync.
Yeah, we'll get into it.
Yeah, we have this thing around script execution.
So for a long time, I thought that these would actually all be separate releases,
that we would do like a staggered series of releases.
And I was excited about that because, well, first of all, that's always fun.
Like you kind of like have a bunch of things and you're like shipping
like one week, one week, one week, and everyone's like,
oh my gosh, we're shipping so much stuff.
But the thing we found was like, they're all kind of interconnected
in subtle ways.
And like the project management and the tool API,
they're just not as interesting if you don't have like the Python API.
Like they are interesting, but the fact that we have the complete story
of like you do uv run and we install Python,
we've resolved your dependencies, we install your dependencies,
we run the command in the environment, like that whole picture,
like everything's a little bit interconnected.
So that's how this release came to be so much stuff is we had this vision
for what we wanted the full stories to be,
and they all became somewhat interconnected.
And in the end, they're all like individually,
I think really powerful things, but they kind of come together
to give this what we want this Python experience to be.
And we're not like totally there yet, you know, we're missing stuff for sure.
But this was our attempt to capture kind of a couple different workflows
that are intertwined in different ways.
Yeah, I see how they all interconnect,
but they are also interesting on their own.
Yes.
The Python installation thing is interesting.
And usable on their own, by the way.
Yeah, exactly.
They're all independently, you just had one of those,
you'd be like, that's pretty cool.
Okay, I like that.
That's pretty cool.
So let's talk just a bit more about the Python one.
So there's analogies here to other tools that people may know,
and the closest one for this would be Pyenv, do you think?
Yeah, probably.
It's like there are obviously differences,
but that's a very popular one that a lot of people know.
Yeah, I'm not saying they're identical,
but it fulfills a role that a lot of people were solving with it.
Now, when I tried to do Pyenv,
I don't remember what I was doing wrong,
but this was the early days of Apple Silicon,
and maybe I had the Intel X64 version of Homebrew,
but I had the build tools for ARM, I can't remember.
Yeah, trying to do something under Rosetta or something.
Yeah, and I couldn't get it to install anything with Pyenv,
because it would download it, it would try to compile it,
then there'd be some weird compiler bug,
and I'm like, "You know what? I'm not debugging the source of...
I'm just not debugging this. I'm out.
I'm just going to go download it."
And also, I compile Python for some of the server stuff I'm doing,
and it takes a while.
It's not that fast.
And when I get it from you guys,
if I say, "UV Python install 3.12" or something, boom, I get it.
In your standard style, it's fast.
How is it fast?
Yeah, so that comes down to a fundamental difference
between what we're doing and what Py...
I don't know if it's Pyenv or Pyenv, by the way.
I think it's Pyenv, by the way.
Okay, so I'm just going to say that, because what I'm used to.
Let's go with that.
If I do the other, I will mess up.
So the way that Pyenv typically works is...
It's a great tool, a lot of people use it.
It's building Python from source, and there are trade-offs around this,
but the idea is it will build the version of Python that you need.
What we're doing is we're building a top-up project
called Python Build Standalone,
originally created by Greg Sork.
And that's a project that we've started contributing to,
so I think I did the last two releases, maybe.
But the idea here is we have these standalone,
easily redistributable Python builds.
And when we do a release, it will create Python builds
for a bunch of Linux architectures for macOS,
for Windows, on all the different Python versions.
And it will also run a bunch of optimizations over them.
So it will do...
These acronyms, it's not important that you understand them,
but it can do link time optimization, or LTO,
and profile guided optimization, PGO.
So we build all the binaries in advance.
That's pretty impressive.
Yeah, that all happens in advance.
So if you go to the releases page here,
like scroll up a little bit,
and just click the latest release,
you'll see all the...
Yeah, like 773 artifacts.
That's like 773 Python builds.
So it's a lot of different Pythons.
Yeah, yeah, it's a lot of different Python builds.
Yeah, 773 different...
So we build all this stuff,
and then when you run Python install,
we figure out the correct...
See, we have like R, and we have all this stuff.
So then we figure out the correct Python for your machine,
we just download and unzip it.
The same way you get a wheel is the way you get this.
Yeah, I mean, it's actually the same code pretty much
like under the hood for us, right?
It's like we stream and unzip it down into disk.
And that's great.
It's like super fast.
It's also...
They're already optimized, like PyM by default
does not compile with optimizations.
You can compile with optimizations,
but it's not what it does by default.
So these will be noticeably faster
than what you would get by default with PyM.
There are some downsides,
like some people like to build from source, right?
They like to have effectively the full chain
of reproducibility in the build.
And now you're kind of trusting us
to give you your Pythons.
So that is a downside to some people.
Yeah, but then the next thing you do
is you pip install something
that has a binary wheel anyway, so...
Yeah, yeah, no, that is true.
There are also a couple of quirks with these builds
that we're working on a little bit.
Some of it has to do with licensing,
the fact that you want to have kind of a statically...
You want to have a self-contained Python,
and there are some things in there
that require licensing changes.
So, you know, it uses all...
There are some slight deviations
from what you would get with building from source
from CPython, and those are documented
in Python build standalone.
But, you know, the general idea is
we pre-build and pre-optimize these Pythons,
and then we download them on demand
and it makes it really fast.
Awesome.
When I go to python.org and download a DMG package
or an MSI for Windows or whatever,
it runs this installer process
that takes a good long while,
and, you know, Jake just pointed out
a similar experience I had.
He says it took me less than two seconds
to install 3.10.
Yeah.
Same thing for 3.12.
So what is...
Are we missing anything
compared to running a proper installer
that seems to take 20 seconds
even on a fast computer?
I think those installers also have to do
some operations from source, most likely,
because they're not shipping...
I could be wrong about that.
I haven't looked at them closely,
but Python in general, like, see...
Like, you know, python.org does not distribute
these kind of pre-built binary distributions
for all these different architectures.
And there's interest in doing that,
and I'm also interested in doing that.
But, you know, it needs to be...
You know, there are some things
that need to be decided,
standards that potentially need to be set.
So, you know, it's possible that eventually
we can just grab these basically from python.org.
I think our PyPy downloads come from python.org,
if I'm not mistaken.
PyPy, that is.
Or it actually might come from pypy.org.
Now I can't remember.
Okay, anyway, those come from some sort
of official source.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, yeah, maybe eventually.
But for now, yeah, we're using Python build standalone,
and we've just been trying to grow our familiarity
with the project, too.
Right. Okay, so let's give people a sense here.
Like, they do not have Python at all,
or they can't count on having Python
or the right version of Python.
They can run a single shell command to get UV,
which UV can then manage itself.
They could pipx install the UV.
Can you homebrew?
Yeah.
What other way?
Yeah, you can get UV on your machine however you want.
Like, UV doesn't need to be in the virtual environment
that it's manipulating.
It can just be anywhere on your machine,
and it can operate on any environment.
It's an external tool sort of deal, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So you can install it with pip.
We have our own standalone installers that you can curl.
It's on homebrew, right?
You can install it with pipx.
You can install it however you want.
And then ultimately, it can operate on any environment
on your machine.
So I actually don't recommend installing it
in a virtual environment.
I recommend installing it globally.
Yeah, that's how I have it as well.
And you're kind of working from there.
Yeah.
I believe I have pipx installed.
Because anything that falls into that category for me
goes under pipx, at least for now.
Yeah.
We'll talk about that in a minute.
I mean, one interesting thing is if you use our installers,
like the curl installers, then you get access
to self-updates.
So you can run UV self-update, and we will update
to the latest version.
That's right.
Because I tried to--
We can't really do that if you--
Yeah.
We can't do that if you installed through a different
package manager, because we don't really know
how it was installed.
So if you install it through the installer, right,
you get a receipt that we understand where we installed it
and all that kind of stuff.
So that's one benefit, but you're not required
to do that, of course.
Sure.
I ran into that when I just wanted to see what it would do
if I ran a self-update.
And it said, you installed this from a package manager
type thing, so go do that thing.
But that's fine.
I have automation for all those things,
so it's not a big deal.
So to give people a sense, once UV is on your system
and in the path, you can say UV venv --python
and put some variation of a Python version.
And if you have it, great, it'll use it, right,
to create the virtual environment.
If you don't have it, it will then do this
two-second download install deal, assuming you have fiber,
and then create a virtual environment based on it, right?
Yep, that's right.
And you can turn that off, but that is the default behavior.
Yeah, that's awesome.
And you can also pass commands like managed only,
I think it is, or something like that, where you say
don't use the system Python, even if it exists.
Yeah, only use the Pythons that UV will install,
or only use the Pythons that are on my machine,
ignore UV's Pythons.
There's some customizations around that.
Right, you could do the opposite.
I will also say this version, by the way,
this version format request thing is so hard.
Yeah, it's just like, you'd just be shocked
how much engineering work has gone into understanding
those requests, and then discovering all the Pythons
on your machine.
And the discovering all the Pythons on your machine
part problem, by the way, is a problem that a bunch
of tools have had to solve.
And we've talked with the VS Code team about
fast Python discovery, because there's just so many
different places that it could be, and on Windows,
it's also totally different than on Unix.
So anyway, a lot of work has gone into that.
But it's kind of hilariously flexible now.
You can say CPython greater than or equal to 3.12,
and then we'll look for CPython rather than PyPy,
rather than GrailPy, or whatever.
So anyway, a lot of work has gone into that.
What if I just say UV, V, E, and V,
and I have no Python whatsoever?
I think we would install the latest Python.
Would you just go, yeah, just do a latest,
like maybe a--
I think that would count as any Python.
--inclusive ----Python space three.
Yeah.
I think that would count as give me any Python
from the list of downloads, and then we sort by version.
So I think you would effectively get the latest
compatible version.
But now you're kind of quizzing me a little bit,
so I'm going to--
No, I don't mean to be quizzing you.
No, I'm just kidding.
All right, so we'll move on.
I know there's so much more, and we don't have a ton of time
to get it.
But I just pulled up my warp terminal,
and I typed UV Python list.
And it shows me a bunch of options for ARM64,
for macOS, 3.12.5, 3.12.0, 3.11.9, 3.10.3, 8,
and so on that I could pick.
However, I'm just wondering where your cutting edge needle
setting is going to go here.
I don't see a 3.13.
Yeah, we're working on it.
We're working on it.
And one of the things that is tricky about any of these
package manager stories is if I homebrew it,
I'll see that there's a new Python.
Especially a major release.
But I might have to wait a week before it's available
on homebrew.
But homebrew will auto-update it.
But if I install it from the installer from python.org,
it won't auto-update it.
There's always a little drawback.
And so when I saw this feature, I'm like,
"Well, if this thing could just really soon have the newest one,
that would just be icing on the cake."
So what is your policy on how quickly to adopt new things,
how quickly to adopt release candidates and betas
and things like that?
Yeah, like with 3.13, I mean, I would like to have it out
as soon as there's an RC.
That's what I would like to do.
Okay.
Our policy or our goal is to make sure that it's out
before the stable release.
So we would like to not be lagging on the stable release.
And we view the minor releases in Python similarly
and rough historically.
We'll be like, "Okay, we want to make sure that we support
all the 3.12 language features before 3.12 is stable."
And there were a bunch of language features in 3.12.
There was some new grammar.
There were new typing features.
And so the goal there, again, was the goal is to have it out
by the time it's stable.
So that's typically the contract we try and uphold.
And that's still our plan for 3.13.
Okay, awesome.
Yeah, good to know.
Yeah.
Jay Geller says, "It would be nice to have an option
to install pre-release builds."
And Tushar says, "The thing is, Python build standalone
builds 600 releases per version number.
Having that run daily is too much.
But if anyone could do some interesting caching,
surely the Astral folks could do some sweet caching."
It's kind of amazing, though.
That project runs.
It's not like we don't own it.
It's not under our order.
That project runs completely for free on GitHub Actions.
Wow.
Isn't that kind of remarkable?
Yeah, GitHub is ridiculous.
Yeah.
So anyway, that's kind of just cool.
How much traffic it handles and how much data.
Yeah, they're pretty awesome.
Okay, so if you don't have Python, you can also,
you don't have to do a VNV.
You can just say, "UV Python install," give it a version,
and then you'll just have that.
That's what Jake and I were referring to earlier.
But you can also create a VNV.
And this is sort of a philosophy that I'm getting.
And sorry, someone said this earlier,
but it scrolled off the livestream comments,
that this prefer or require virtual environments by default
rather than prefer to try to jam stuff into system Python
or the core Python.
And then it could be a virtual environment
if you really know the incantations.
Yeah, yeah.
That's probably like, you know,
when we did the release in February,
we tried to steer pretty closely to the way pip behaves
to make it easy for people.
But we did pick a few battles
where we wanted to intentionally diverge.
And this was one of the bigger ones,
which is UV by default requires a virtual environment.
So if you try and UV pip install and there's no,
we can't find a virtual environment
in the current directory or an active virtual environment,
we'll throw an error.
And you can opt out of that by passing a system flag.
But unlike pip, right, it's opt out.
So you have to, by default, it uses a virtual environment
and you can escape from that if you want to intentionally.
So we're trying to, like with these APIs too,
like these are all virtual environment.
Well, the tool stuff, it is, but in a different way,
like UV run, UV lock, UV sync.
These all create a virtual environment
in the project directory where the project is defined
by a PyProject toml.
So if you run UV run in that directory,
it will look at the dependencies, resolve them,
create a lock file, create a virtual environment,
install their locked versions into the virtual environment,
run the command.
And it does that every time, but it's so fast that we,
well, hopefully so fast that we can do it.
So like if the dependencies haven't changed,
it will still make sure that everything's up to date.
So if you just use UV run, we try and keep
the whole environment in sync for you.
And you don't have to think about how do I manage
my environment?
How do I activate it?
How do I install stuff?
But we're pretty like, we're pretty pro virtual environment.
And one thing I want to do, and it's sometimes hard
to hold these lines because you have users who come to you
and want something really different.
And it can be hard not to say yes to a lot of the things
that users want.
But some lines, I think we have to hold because they,
if we can see it on them, sorry, I'm making it sound
like a battle, but if we can see it on them,
it just limits the things we can do in the future.
Like if we make things too flexible,
it limits some of the things, some of the possibilities
of what we can do in the future.
And like one thing that I kind of want to change
the perception around is like, I think virtual environments
are like, they're here to stay really.
And I am, so we like embrace them, but I want to change
some of how people like think about virtual environments.
In particular, I want to change this whole idea
of like activating a virtual environment.
Like I want it to feel more like node modules,
which people don't necessarily think, you know,
highly of node modules.
Like I think when people think of node modules,
they think of a huge node modules folder
with like a ton of bloat.
But the idea there is like when you're in a project,
you just sort of run commands and all the packages
just get installed there.
And it just runs in the correct environment
with the correct dependencies.
And that's actually what I kind of want.
That's actually what I want Python to feel like is,
yeah, there's a virtual environment,
but it's actually just kind of like the directories of,
you know, it's kind of just like full of packages,
full of your dependencies.
And it just, you just use the right one
at the right points in time.
So that's part of the shift that I want us
to move towards a little bit.
And it's part of why we're very virtual environment first
and why we put the virtual environment right
in the project in a specific known place.
Because we want to get away a little bit
from this idea of where's the environment?
How do I activate it?
Do I have the wrong one activated?
I want it to feel a little bit more like it
is just sort of native to how the project works.
- If you're in the context of that thing,
then it just uses the right one.
Do you have intentions to do something?
I can't remember the path,
but something to the effect where if you're in a directory
and there's no PyProject, TML or virtual environment,
but if you went up one or two, or both,
would it fall to that one or would it just go?
- We do do that with UV run.
So with UV run, we sort of find the root of the project
and we'll look up at parent directories.
But we don't, but if you just run Python,
you know, blah, blah, blah,
obviously we don't hook into anything there.
And so, you know, like with a lot of other things,
like with UV run, UV lock, UV sync,
we create a virtual environment.
If you use our commands, it's kind of just like,
everything just works,
but you can also just activate the virtual environment
and do whatever you want,
because we're kind of trying to embrace the fact
that virtual environments are like,
everyone knows, not everyone knows how to use them,
but people are familiar with them.
Editors and tooling revolve around them.
So things that try to eject from virtual environments
tend to cause a lot of problems for editors and workflows.
So part of embracing virtual environments, I think again,
is like meeting the ecosystem where it is a little bit
and being like, okay,
the fact that we use virtual environments
and they're just like in your project means that
you don't need like a special like editor integration
to use UV, like, you know,
like PyCharm will just like let you use that virtual environment
which is a normal virtual environment,
from this perspective.
So that's, again, part of what we're trying to do
is like build things that just work for people
and try and embrace, you know,
the standards and the conventions while also, you know,
maybe influencing or changing parts of them
that we think could be improved
or could be made more user-friendly.
- Yeah.
I don't know why I didn't book you
for a two and a half hour podcast,
'cause that's what we're gonna need.
So Vincent from Comcast says,
"UV run is such a game changer.
"He may work on a Jupyter runner for that this week."
Feels like such a game changer, which is awesome.
- Cool.
Yeah, there's a lot of cool ideas too around this sort of,
sorry, go ahead.
- Well, I was gonna say, with that in mind,
let's dive into this whole project management stuff here.
Right?
I think this is one of the three big pieces
of functionality that comes through.
And you've been talking about
this sort of, some of the features like UV run and so on,
but let's talk through, let's talk through,
- Yeah.
- I wanna create a new project.
- Yeah, I wanna create a project.
I don't have the Python installed.
It's a new project.
I wanna create a pyproject.toml,
but I don't even remember the format for that.
- Yep.
- Let's go.
How's that work?
- So we have like a series of commands
that kind of manage the project lifecycle for you.
So you can run UV init to create a new project.
And it has a couple of flags based on
whether you wanna build like a library
or a command line application,
whether you want it to be structured as like a Python package
or just kind of, maybe it's just an application
that you're running on your machine.
But UV init will create the project.
You can then run UV add, flask, UV add, FastAPI,
whatever to add dependencies.
And when you run UV add,
it will automatically generate the lock file
and sync the dependencies to your system.
So we do have commands like UV lock
to generate the lock file and UV sync
to download the correct dependencies
into your environment.
But you can also just kind of use these lifecycle commands
and UV will make sure that everything's
in the right state as you go.
So you can run UV add, UV run.
If you do UV run and then Python, blah, blah, blah,
it's, you know, what happens behind the scenes
is we resolve the dependencies.
We make sure the environment's up to date
and then we run that command in the environment.
So the whole lifecycle of working with your project
can be managed through UV init, UV add,
UV remove, UV run.
There's a lot that goes into that.
And there's also a lot of kind of powerful features
built in here too.
Like when you run UV run, it accepts a flag --with.
So you can do UV run --with and put a dependency there.
And it will basically just download that
put it in an ephemeral virtual environment
and make it available for the command.
So you can just pull in one-off dependencies
as you need to run things.
Like I never actually think about activating environments anymore.
Like most of the time when I'm running Python commands
to run one-off tooling, I'm running, you know,
UV run --with requirements and I give it a requirements file
and then, you know, I pass the name of the file I want to run.
And like, it just like builds the thing you need
and runs the command and throws it away.
And because you have, again, we were talking
at the beginning of this episode about how like really fast tools
change the ergonomics.
Like part of what we're trying to build here is like
if we have this packaging system that's really fast,
especially for like repeated operations,
like I need to keep pulling in, you know,
I've downloaded this package before and you download it again
and use it for this one command.
Like we can just like throw away virtual environments
and create new virtual environments, you know,
in like in milliseconds.
Yeah.
So if this was a Python-MVENV sort of install,
it would be way too much overhead.
Yeah.
And so, you know, we can just like even like a bunch
of dependencies, like after they've been installed
on your machine already, it's really, really fast
just to pull these things together, use them
and throw them away.
So there's just a lot of things that we can do.
And I think even like looking forward to the future,
there's a lot of things we can do because we have this
like performance foundation.
Like, you know, I'm thinking about what if you want
to test code on like a bunch of different Python versions.
Yeah.
And maybe you don't want to like have to keep destroying
and recreating your virtual environment
or something like that.
Like there's just a whole lot of stuff that we can build
that would be really hard to imagine if you didn't have
a really fast tool.
Yeah.
It definitely changes what's possible.
Tushar out there put out an example that is very near
and dear to my heart.
You know what would be great?
If UV could build standalone binaries and embed Python
into them.
Yeah.
That's an interesting space.
It's not something we've built anything around, but yeah.
I know it's being described there.
I think what I've seen most of the things do is they'll
do something like zip up a virtual environment or site
packages or something and then put that in a binary.
And then when you run it, it'll spit that out or maybe
do a memory mapped sort of magic to try to map into that
and unzip it into memory or all sorts of weirdness.
And I think really for this to be easy, somewhere along
the way, I could be wrong, not a core developer,
but I feel like Python's import behavior needs to be able
to import from an embedded resource in a compiled binary
rather than stick in a binary and have the binary do weird
things where it fakes out the path.
Because there's always something that falls apart.
But if the pip itself says, "Okay, we can import from
a memory stream and not just from file system,"
then these things would be like, "Oh, well, if that's the case,
here's how you just embed those and off it goes."
It'd be more like Go or say, "Here's your one thing,
you run it." You know what I mean?
Yeah. Yeah. There's definitely interesting stuff to explore
there. And there's some interesting tools that exist already
to try to facilitate some of those things.
It's also, we've invested time in yet though.
Yep. All right.
Yeah, I was thinking PyApp is similar.
Yeah. Yeah. PyApp is definitely. I've used PyApp before.
Actually, I have an app running on my system right now.
It's in a little menu bar thing that's a PyApp app.
And it works well. It does work well.
Yep.
Okay.
So the project API is kind of like, if you've used like poetry
or PDM, these tools that are oriented around working
on a project. And you have a PyProject toml that defines
your dependencies and you might have some sort of structure.
It's based around that kind of workflow of working
on a project, which is, that's like one way that people
work with Python, but there's a lot of ways, there's a lot
of things that people do with Python, which is why we have
a couple of different APIs. Right. So we also have this.
Yeah.
This tool API, like UV tool install, UV tool run,
which we've aliased to UVX. These are for running.
This is interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. These are for running like one-off, not one-off commands,
but like things that you want installed globally.
So like you might want rough installed globally
on your machine so you can run it on a bunch of different
projects. We call those like tools and you install them,
you know, similar if you've used PipX before, we install
them into dedicated environments and put them on your path.
And there's a lot of really cool stuff here.
Like I now use UVX all the time when I want to run things.
So I'll do like UVX rough check and that translates
to UV tool run rough, you know, run the check command.
Behind the scenes, what it does is it finds latest version
of rough, it creates an environment with that version,
and then it runs the command using the rough binary in there.
And there's really no overhead to that if you're kind
of running it repeatedly. So, you know, this is oriented
around like a different way of working with Python
where you have these tools that you need to run
on your machine and you use them for different things.
So we have like the project interface for working
on a project, and then we have the tool interface
for running Python, you know, command line tools.
- Yeah. So UVX run, well, UVX is the run version.
- Yeah.
- And you've also got the install.
I have some thoughts of when I might do one or the other,
but the UV tool install seems like something you might
want to run and have around and have autocomplete
in your shell. So I could type ru tab and get rough,
or I could UV tool install.
- Yeah. I think for things you're going to run repeatedly,
it makes a lot of sense to install them.
Also, if you have, like if you ran UV tool install rough,
and then you ran like UVX rough, we would use
the installed version. So if you already have the tool
installed, we'll still pull the installed version,
assuming it's compatible with the version request
that you made. So like, yeah, I generally like UV tool
install things that I'm going to run, you know,
multiple times. The other really nice thing about UV tool
install is we have UV tool upgrade. So you can do like
UV tool upgrade --all, and we'll upgrade
all the installed tools. So you don't have to think
about like, which tools do I have installed?
Like what versions are they at? Are they out of date?
- Yeah. I love it.
- So, you know, it kind of gives you a way to manage
all the Python tools that you're using at a kind of
global level. So, you know, we have a lot of commands
like in our docs, we have a lot of like automation tooling
built around Python, like, you know, rough and UV are
written in Rust, but a lot of our like documentation
tooling, like we have a lot of scripting in Python.
And all of our docs now in the doc string at the top
have like the UVX command that you run to like run
the script. And so I just like copy that and paste that
and then the script just runs with all of its dependencies.
So it's like, it's just super, it's just very, very
convenient, I think, like all these APIs and the way
they come together. And there's a lot, I know it's a lot
of different stuff. And that was actually my biggest fear
with this release was it's hard to succinctly explain
what this release is, because it's a lot of different
things. And it's not like when we released UV in February,
when we released UV in February, it's like, this is a new
tool, if you know pip, it's a succinct way like what
we're doing. And in this release, it's like, it's actually
like a lot of different stuff that comes together to
tell what I think is a very coherent story. But it's
hard to succinctly explain exactly what, you know,
what we did. And I was very, like the response to it,
I was really heartened, you know, to see that people
were, people were like getting it. And they were
getting different parts of it. Like different parts
of it, we're speaking to different people. Because
I actually think different parts of it are like relevant
to different ways that people work with Python.
So a lot of people were excited about, you know,
the lock files, the UV run, a lot of people were
excited about the fact that we have this like scripting
API. So you can like have these standalone scripts,
where the dependencies are embedded in them. And if
you do UV run that script, you know, we just resolve
the dependencies, download, download them and run
the command with those dependencies available, run
the script with those dependencies available. So you
can have these like hermetic Python scripts. You know,
we had the Python install API. So there were just
different things that were resonating with people,
which I think is what made me happiest in the response
to it.
Did you read, I'm sure you read Armen's, "Rye and UV
August is harvest season for Python packaging."
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a pretty positive take and a pretty
wide ranging recommendation there. It's pretty
interesting.
Yeah, the relationship with Rye is something we get
a lot of questions about. And, you know, I think
like, when we, you know, when we took over Rye, the
goal was always like, we want to build UV up until
to be a suitable replacement that people can migrate
from Rye to UV. But, and we're getting further
along that path, but there's still like things we're
missing. We don't plan on like deprecating Rye
anytime soon, but all of our like new feature
development is really happening in UV and Rye, it's
mostly like bug fixes, like keeping things up to
date. So, you know, Rye has actually benefited a lot
from UV because it uses UV under the hood. So like
Rye has just gotten like there's new features,
there's, you know, it's gotten faster. But, you
know, our goal is really to like find the things
that are missing from Rye and make sure we can
support them in UV.
Yeah. Last one we've got to cover here is,
"Yovhini points out single file scripts with
dependencies." That's the last one, the script
execution. So, yeah, this is a huge problem. One
of the reasons I think Tushar was suggesting it
and I'm also really excited about it is if you
could bundle your code into an application, one
of the benefits is you don't have to have a
conversation with everyone that runs it. How to
do virtual environments, how to do package
management, all this kind of stuff. You just say
run, click it or whatever. And somewhat short of
that is I want to give you just a script of some
sort. And just say run this, right? Here's the
script, you have an example.py, just run that.
But if you put some sort of magical incantation
which is backed by a PEP to say what it actually
requires, then UV --script something,
it'll just see that and go, okay, or UV run
rather, it'll see that, install the pieces
ephemerally, right? And run. That's pretty cool.
Yeah, exactly.
As kind of our last thing before we run out of time.
This is backed by a pep. I think it's 723, if I
recall correctly. So this is like a standardized,
this syntax at the top of the file is standardized.
Might not be mentioned.
Yeah, there's a bunch of PEP conversations, but
not the one.
Yeah, we sometimes try and like shy away from
talking about user-facing features in terms of
peps.
Yeah.
It's because it's not --
There you go, 723, that's it.
Yeah, okay, well, there it is. But anyway, the
idea here is like you can declare the dependencies
for the script right in the script. And then when
you do UV run that script, we read that dependency
data and we run the script in an environment with
those dependencies. So the other, I think, really
cool piece here is I talked before about UV add.
So if you're in a project with a Py Project
toml, you can do like UV add vast API or whatever.
But you can also do that for scripts. So if you
scroll, if you look for like UV add dash dash
script, so you're referred to this like magical
incantation at the top. We will actually like
create that for you. So if you do UV add dash dash
script, and then the script name and the dependencies,
like we'll actually just like put that stuff in
there for you. So you don't actually have to
like remember how to do that. Like you can just
do UV run --script, and we will actually
like populate that field. So you can create a
script, you can manage the dependencies in it
with UV, you can run it. This is like super
useful. There's some interesting conversations
happening now too around like what if we want to
have a lock file for these? Because it's a little
bit different, right? This is the list of
dependencies. It's not the list of resolved
versions. So if you wanted to have like full
reproducibility, you probably want to lock file.
And not just these things versions, but they're
the transitive closure of all the dependencies.
Correct. You know, everything they depend on.
Yeah. So, you know, we do that for projects.
Like if you do UV lock in a project, we create
this lock file. That's all the transitive
dependencies. It locks the exact URLs, the
files, the hashes, the versions, everything. We
don't do that right now for scripts, just because
there's no, there isn't really a place to put it.
But we're kind of thinking about...
Have you considered the Windows registry?
I mean, you could always just like integrate
that and import that over to Mac and Linux.
That'd be fine.
Yeah. Just put everything in the Windows
registry.
Yeah. That's a winning idea.
Yeah.
No, I totally get it.
Yeah. I mean, the other thing that's interesting
too is like the notebooks, like people are
thinking about how can we add this kind of
functionality to notebooks and, you know, being
able to declare the dependencies for a notebook
right in the notebook, being able to unlock
them too. There's a lot of cool stuff that we
can build now that we have all these primitives
connected.
Yeah, for sure. I mean, you could do something
like take a hash of the file and then use that
hash as the name and long as the file doesn't
change, it'll run the same. I don't know.
Yeah.
Yeah. I'll leave that to you all.
So I think, I mean, we didn't even talk about
the speed for some of these things and there's
a whole lot of stuff here, but.
There's a lot of good stories to tell about
how we made some of these things. The problems
we had to solve to like really some of this
stuff, but they'll make for, you know, if I
dream, they'll make for good blog posts. In
reality, they'll probably make for good Twitter
threads.
Absolutely. All right. Well, Charlie, thanks
for being here. Maybe give us a final thoughts
and words for folks who are interested in this
new layer of UV.
Yeah. I mean, I think like this is, this release
is really different from the previous release
in part because we designed and built a lot
of stuff that's pretty new for people and also
requires people to change their workflows in a
lot of cases. Like the previous release, it was
like, this is a lot like PIP, so kind of just
drop it in. And now it's like, here's a bunch
of ways to use these tools. If you were, it
does require you to work a certain way and kind
of think a certain way, but we think it's really
powerful. And that's all stuff we're like kind
of trying to figure out. Right. So we're very
eager for, you know, I'm sure, I'm sure all this
stuff will change and I'm just eager for like,
like every release, I'm just excited to have it
out, have people testing it, have people using
it so we can get feedback. And so, you know, I
would love for you to try it out. I'd love you
even more for you to come file issues about the
things that don't work so we can make it better
but I think we have a really cool foundation
here. We can build a lot of things that hopefully
make working with Python a lot, you know, a lot
easier in the sense that the tools kind of get
out of your way rather than getting in your way.
So yeah, that'll be our focus for the next, for
the next while is seeing how people are using
this stuff and seeing where we can make it
better. Well, I think it's pretty awesome. We
all are up to big fan of UV so happy to see
the project. Thank you. And always happy to
have you on. So thank you. Yeah. See you later.
Bye.